#Title

Meta-Analysis of Genetic Mutations and Their Relationship With Nutrient Deficiencies in the Context of Functional Medicine
#Abstract

Beyond traditional bandaid-fix medicine, functional medicine provides root solutions to people’s health problems. These solutions involve using personal genetics, supplementing for vitamin deficiencies, fixing bad lifestyle habits, and accounting for mental health. Currently, there is little research on how peoples’ genetic mutations, or more specifically Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), interact in their body. This combination of mutations creates complex physical and mental problems that cannot necessarily just be accounted for by supplementing specific nutrient deficiencies. Sometimes very specific dosing is needed, and a specific combination of supplements as well. For individuals pursuing this path in healthcare, an extreme amount of trial and error is necessary to reach desired relative homeostasis, which can take years. Hypothetically, these SNPs can be causing many physical and mental illnesses that we currently have no idea what the root causes are. A core objective for this project will be to lay the foundation for using Data Science and AI to create practical solutions. This will allow for connections to be made for the combination of effects of the SNPs to the nutrient state of the patient, therefore reducing variables and expediting the trial and error process significantly. Overall, the goal of this project is to research the effects of SNPs on the body, how to account for large combinations of them, make connections with this data to current illnesses, and research if it is possible to use Data Science and AI to create solutions to these complex issues. This preparatory research project will lay the foundation for future projects that can create practical solutions to these issues.
#Introduction/Background

Having good health is an extremely complex multivariable equation that most modern doctors do not have the time to put the effort into solving, but rather focus on treating symptoms. Modern doctors’ solutions are band-aid fixes that do not address the core reasons of people’s issues and are reliant on insurance companies’ funding to pay for expensive medications. Functional medicine doctors take a deeper look into individuals’ biochemistry and can provide real solutions to those individuals’ ailments. This includes factors such as understanding personal genetics, supplementing for vitamin deficiencies, fixing bad lifestyle habits, and accounting for mental health. However, these functional medicine doctors are limited by the time, resources, and manpower at their disposal. For complex issues such as a patient having dozens of SNPs, a functional medicine doctor cannot practically create a solution for them because of the complexity of understanding how all of these variables interact.
Current research has identified large amounts of SNPs and how they interact with the human body. Science has identified how SNPs interact with our nutrient levels and how that impacts our body. For example, the MAOA gene, when this gene presents in its slow version, it allows buildup of neurotransmitters, including dopamine and serotonin, which allows for aggressive behavior to take more presence in an individual’s behaviors (McDermott et al., 2008). Current research stagnates in the understanding of the effects of multiple SNPs when presented in conjunction. Most individuals have a number of SNPs; however, some individuals present with a large number of SNPs. These individuals find difficulty locating medical professionals that are well versed in the complexity present with a large number of SNPs interacting.
Solutions need to be created to understand human biochemistry better on a comprehensive level. With the recent emergence of AI knowledge, solving problems with massive amounts of variables and data is now more efficient than anytime in human history. Implementing Data Science and AI into health research will be a necessary step forward to advance modern medical knowledge. By creating a foundation of knowledge for this research, it will allow for a much larger project to be constructed where larger amounts of data can be analyzed to make connections, studies can be run with human trials to test hypotheses directly, and programs can be made to predict, prevent, and solve patient issues much better than an individual doctor could alone. Current doctors could utilize this information and future programs to better assist patients and potentially cure people or reduce their symptoms to more manageable levels. This research will have broad implications within all medicine, as genetics and nutrients play a huge role in many health issues. The end goal is to eventually create a program that utilizes a high-level biochemical map of humans that combines various independent variables such as genetics, nutrients, and symptoms as input, and resulting in possible solutions as output.
#Research or Project Plan

Initially, the research will begin with a meta-analysis of existing literature involving SNPs and their individual effects on the human body. Based on findings from the meta-analysis, research will source data on critical nutrients and the problems that may result when those nutrients are too low or too high. This research stream will create a foundational knowledge of how single SNPs interact and their effects on nutrient levels.
Additional research streams will focus on understanding SNP interactions. Specifically, the research will investigate how multiple SNPs when combined affect nutrient levels. Results from this research stream will begin to develop correlations between these observations and current unsolved health conditions. This stream will also gather critical data needed for an AI-powered application that can process the gathered data and turn it into an applicable solution. This involves critical connections between the chemical pathways, stated in another way, a map involving how genes affect the systemic cycles. The research could be expedited with the addition of interdisciplinary collaboration.
The research stream will be extended to include current functional medicine approaches to solving genetic and nutrient-based health issues. The research will identify limitations in current treatment approaches, particularly in handling multiple SNP interactions. Results from the research will help to identify which methodologies need optimization, and where a solution can be integrated to provide the most utility for doctors.
Confirmational results from the research could further extend the stream to designating a framework for additional studies into functional medicine in relation to SNPs. This framework will include a dedicated team, primary and secondary data, data analytics, and human trials. The project would be longitudinal in nature allowing for observation of subjects and results across timespans, and will involve interdisciplinary collaboration between the fields of computer science, biomedical, and biology.
#Justification of Stipend and Budget: How Will Work Hours Be Assessed by Faculty Mentor?

The research stream will involve extensive exploration, discovery, and analysis of existing academic literature. A stipend for this discovery process would allow the researcher to approach the project in a professional manner while dedicating the resources required. The faculty mentor will utilize a time-keeping application to evaluate the hours dedicated by the researcher. Additionally, a research repository will be established and monitored by the mentor on a daily basis with weekly meetings between the mentor and researcher to discuss findings and progress. Further, the research approach will use agile methodologies necessitating daily standups between the mentor and the researcher. Each section of the research project will be delivered based on an agile sprint delivery cycle. Each delivery cycle will be composed of a completed component of the research.
#Anticipated Results

Anticipated results will be multifaceted including a publishable meta-analysis of the current status of research into the field, a strong foundational knowledge of SNPs and their effects to prepare for future research streams, and a framework for how Data Science and AI principles can be applied to the problem to develop an applicable solution.
#How the Project Extends Both Your Own Present Knowledge and Contributes to Your Field of Study; Its Value and to Whom

For some context, I have had health concerns my whole life, and more recently my health issues have become much more exasperated. This has led me down a journey of intense research into why I have so many symptoms of different things all across the board. I have a tremendous amount of allergies to food and things in nature, and I have had constant issues with brain fog, memory, concentration, energy, anxiety, overstimulation, and many more things in the past year and a half. I have had a genetic test done and I have 40+ SNPs where most people have only 5-10. I have had bloodwork and neurotransmitter tests done on me and both have extreme irregularities. Almost all of my neurotransmitters were in the low range which even the functional medicine doctor said was an abnormality. I have devoted myself to researching this field to help myself and others who are having similar struggles. This is not my field of study in college; I am a computer science major concentrating in Data Science and AI. After much deliberation, I realized that my knowledge of Data Science and AI would be extremely useful in trailblazing this field. I have done large amounts of research into SNPs and have experimented with supplementation for the past year and a half and it has helped me tremendously. By analyzing large amounts of data from people, it is possible to create actual solutions to these problems instead of people having to guess on what to take. After analyzing many people I have interacted with, I have found that almost everyone has some sort of issue that can be explained with my research, no matter if they have a big or small issue. For people with big issues, this will help them return to a state of relative normalcy. People with small issues might not even realize they have an issue, so this field can potentially even help people who feel bad and do not realize it. I think this has the potential to help all human beings to lead happier, healthier lives.
#Role of Faculty Advisor

The faculty advisor will take on the role of a mentor. As an undergraduate student, I have had little exposure to academic research and need guidance to ensure I am approaching this task in an ethical and methodical form. The faculty mentor will act as a guide on how to approach the research, how to develop an academic paper from the results, and how best to apply agile methodologies to the process. Additionally, the faculty mentor will provide subject matter expertise during the development of the framework on how to apply AI and Data Science concepts to the problem at hand.
#References
McDermott, R., Tingley, D., Cowden, J., Frazzetto, G., & Johnson, D. D. P. (2008). MAOA and the neurogenetic architecture of human aggression. Trends in Neurosciences, 31(3), 120-129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2007.12.006
